# PocketFlow is a data-and-knowledge-driven structure-based molecular generative model

Abstract: None

TLDR: None

# Harmonic Prior Self-conditioned Flow Matching for Multi-Ligand Docking and Binding Site Design

Abstract: A significant amount of protein function requires binding small molecules, including enzymatic catalysis. As such, designing binding pockets for small molecules has several impactful applications ranging from drug synthesis to energy storage. Towards this goal, we first develop H ARMONIC F LOW , an improved generative process over 3D protein-ligand binding structures based on our self-conditioned flow matching objective. F LOW S ITE extends this flow model to jointly generate a protein pocket’s discrete residue types and the molecule’s binding 3D structure. We show that H ARMONIC F LOW improves upon the state-of-the-art generative processes for docking in simplicity, generality, and performance. Enabled by this structure model, F LOW S ITE designs binding sites substantially better than baseline approaches and provides the first general solution for binding site design.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'H ARMONIC F LOW is developed, an improved generative process over 3D protein-ligand binding structures based on a self-conditioned flow matching objective that designs binding sites substantially better than baseline approaches and provides the first general solution for binding site design.'}

# Benchmarking Generated Poses: How Rational is Structure-based Drug Design with Generative Models?

Abstract: Deep generative models for structure-based drug design (SBDD), where molecule generation is conditioned on a 3D protein pocket, have received considerable interest in recent years. These methods offer the promise of higher-quality molecule generation by explicitly modelling the 3D interaction between a potential drug and a protein receptor. However, previous work has primarily focused on the quality of the generated molecules themselves, with limited evaluation of the 3D molecule \emph{poses} that these methods produce, with most work simply discarding the generated pose and only reporting a"corrected"pose after redocking with traditional methods. Little is known about whether generated molecules satisfy known physical constraints for binding and the extent to which redocking alters the generated interactions. We introduce PoseCheck, an extensive analysis of multiple state-of-the-art methods and find that generated molecules have significantly more physical violations and fewer key interactions compared to baselines, calling into question the implicit assumption that providing rich 3D structure information improves molecule complementarity. We make recommendations for future research tackling identified failure modes and hope our benchmark can serve as a springboard for future SBDD generative modelling work to have a real-world impact.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'PoseCheck is introduced, an extensive analysis of multiple state-of-the-art methods and it is found that generated molecules have significantly more physical violations and fewer key interactions compared to baselines, calling into question the implicit assumption that providing rich 3D structure information improves molecule complementarity.'}

# Optimization of binding affinities in chemical space with generative pre-trained transformer and deep reinforcement learning

Abstract: Background The key challenge in drug discovery is to discover novel compounds with desirable properties. Among the properties, binding affinity to a target is one of the prerequisites and usually evaluated by molecular docking or quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) models. Methods In this study, we developed SGPT-RL, which uses a generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) as the policy network of the reinforcement learning (RL) agent to optimize the binding affinity to a target. SGPT-RL was evaluated on the Moses distribution learning benchmark and two goal-directed generation tasks, with Dopamine Receptor D2 (DRD2) and Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) as the targets. Both QSAR model and molecular docking were implemented as the optimization goals in the tasks. The popular Reinvent method was used as the baseline for comparison. Results The results on the Moses benchmark showed that SGPT-RL learned good property distributions and generated molecules with high validity and novelty. On the two goal-directed generation tasks, both SGPT-RL and Reinvent were able to generate valid molecules with improved target scores. The SGPT-RL method achieved better results than Reinvent on the ACE2 task, where molecular docking was used as the optimization goal. Further analysis shows that SGPT-RL learned conserved scaffold patterns during exploration. Conclusions The superior performance of SGPT-RL in the ACE2 task indicates that it can be applied to the virtual screening process where molecular docking is widely used as the criteria. Besides, the scaffold patterns learned by SGPT-RL during the exploration process can assist chemists to better design and discover novel lead candidates.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'The superior performance of SGPT-RL in the ACE2 task indicates that it can be applied to the virtual screening process where molecular docking is widely used as the criteria, and the scaffold patterns learned by SGPT-RL during the exploration process can assist chemists to better design and discover novel lead candidates.'}

# Semi-equivariant conditional normalizing flows, with applications to target-aware molecule generation

Abstract: Learning over the domain of 3D graphs has applications in a number of scientific and engineering disciplines, including molecular chemistry, high energy physics, and computer vision. We consider a specific problem in this domain, namely: given one such 3D graph, dubbed the base graph, our goal is to learn a conditional distribution over another such graph, dubbed the complement graph. Due to the three-dimensional nature of the graphs in question, there are certain natural invariances such a distribution should satisfy: it should be invariant to rigid body transformations that act jointly on the base graph and the complement graph, and it should also be invariant to permutations of the vertices of either graph. We propose a general method for learning the conditional probabilistic model, the central part of which is a continuous normalizing flow. We establish semi-equivariance conditions on the flow which guarantee the aforementioned invariance conditions on the conditional distribution. Additionally, we propose a graph neural network architecture which implements this flow, and which is designed to learn effectively despite the typical differences in size between the base graph and the complement graph. We demonstrate the utility of our technique in the molecular setting by training a conditional generative model which, given a receptor, can generate ligands which may successfully bind to that receptor. The resulting model, which has potential applications in drug design, displays high quality performance in the key ΔBinding metric.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'The technique is demonstrated by training a conditional generative model which, given a receptor, can generate ligands which may successfully bind to that receptor, which has potential applications in drug design and high quality performance in the key ΔBinding metric.'}

# ResGen is a pocket-aware 3D molecular generation model based on parallel multiscale modelling

Abstract: None

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'A three-dimensional molecular generative model conditioned on protein pockets, termed ResGen, for designing organic molecules inside of a given target, which has a higher success rate than existing state-of-the-art approaches in generating novel molecules that can bind to unseen targets more tightly than the original ligands.'}

# 3D Equivariant Diffusion for Target-Aware Molecule Generation and Affinity Prediction

Abstract: Rich data and powerful machine learning models allow us to design drugs for a specific protein target \textit{in silico}. Recently, the inclusion of 3D structures during targeted drug design shows superior performance to other target-free models as the atomic interaction in the 3D space is explicitly modeled. However, current 3D target-aware models either rely on the voxelized atom densities or the autoregressive sampling process, which are not equivariant to rotation or easily violate geometric constraints resulting in unrealistic structures. In this work, we develop a 3D equivariant diffusion model to solve the above challenges. To achieve target-aware molecule design, our method learns a joint generative process of both continuous atom coordinates and categorical atom types with a SE(3)-equivariant network. Moreover, we show that our model can serve as an unsupervised feature extractor to estimate the binding affinity under proper parameterization, which provides an effective way for drug screening. To evaluate our model, we propose a comprehensive framework to evaluate the quality of sampled molecules from different dimensions. Empirical studies show our model could generate molecules with more realistic 3D structures and better affinities towards the protein targets, and improve binding affinity ranking and prediction without retraining.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'Empirical studies show the proposed 3D equivariant diffusion model could generate molecules with more realistic 3D structures and better affinities towards the protein targets, and improve binding affinity ranking and prediction without retraining.'}

# Beam Enumeration: Probabilistic Explainability For Sample Efficient Self-conditioned Molecular Design

Abstract: Generative molecular design has moved from proof-of-concept to real-world applicability, as marked by the surge in very recent papers reporting experimental validation. Key challenges in explainability and sample efficiency present opportunities to enhance generative design to directly optimize expensive high-fidelity oracles and provide actionable insights to domain experts. Here, we propose Beam Enumeration to exhaustively enumerate the most probable sub-sequences from language-based molecular generative models and show that molecular substructures can be extracted. When coupled with reinforcement learning, extracted substructures become meaningful, providing a source of explainability and improving sample efficiency through self-conditioned generation. Beam Enumeration is generally applicable to any language-based molecular generative model and notably further improves the performance of the recently reported Augmented Memory algorithm, which achieved the new state-of-the-art on the Practical Molecular Optimization benchmark for sample efficiency. The combined algorithm generates more high reward molecules and faster, given a fixed oracle budget. Beam Enumeration shows that improvements to explainability and sample efficiency for molecular design can be made synergistic.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'Beam Enumeration is proposed to exhaustively enumerate the most probable sub-sequences from language-based molecular generative models and show that molecular substructures can be extracted, showing that improvements to explainability and sample efficiency for molecular design can be made synergistic.'}

# DecompDiff: Diffusion Models with Decomposed Priors for Structure-Based Drug Design

Abstract: Designing 3D ligands within a target binding site is a fundamental task in drug discovery. Existing structured-based drug design methods treat all ligand atoms equally, which ignores different roles of atoms in the ligand for drug design and can be less efficient for exploring the large drug-like molecule space. In this paper, inspired by the convention in pharmaceutical practice, we decompose the ligand molecule into two parts, namely arms and scaffold, and propose a new diffusion model, DecompDiff, with decomposed priors over arms and scaffold. In order to facilitate the decomposed generation and improve the properties of the generated molecules, we incorporate both bond diffusion in the model and additional validity guidance in the sampling phase. Extensive experiments on CrossDocked2020 show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in generating high-affinity molecules while maintaining proper molecular properties and conformational stability, with up to -8.39 Avg. Vina Dock score and 24.5 Success Rate. The code is provided at <https://github.com/bytedance/DecompDiff>

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This paper decomposes the ligand molecule into two parts, namely arms and scaffold, and proposes a new diffusion model, DecompDiff, with decomposed priors over arms and scaffold with decomposed priors over arms and scaffold in order to facilitate the decomposed generation and improve the properties of the generated molecules.'}

# Design and optimization of novel succinate dehydrogenase inhibitors against agricultural fungi based on Transformer model

Abstract: Succinate dehydrogenase inhibitors (SDHIs) are a promising class of fungicides targeting the energy production pathway of pathogenic fungi. However, overuse has led to resistance, necessitating the development of new and effective SDHIs. This study takes the Transformer model to generate a customized virtual library of potential SDHIs. These candidates were then meticulously screened based on expert knowledge and synthetic feasibility, ultimately yielding several pyrazole carboxamide derivatives as the promising leads. Subsequent synthesis, antifungal activity testing, and structural optimization further refined these leads into potent SDHI candidates. This work marks the first application of a generative model to SDHI design, establishing a robust workflow for virtual library generation, screening, activity evaluation, and structure optimization. This provides one way for the rational design of future SDHIs, not only against fungi, but potentially other agricultural pathogens as well.

TLDR: None

# Pocket2Mol: Efficient Molecular Sampling Based on 3D Protein Pockets

Abstract: Deep generative models have achieved tremendous success in designing novel drug molecules in recent years. A new thread of works have shown the great potential in advancing the specificity and success rate of in silico drug design by considering the structure of protein pockets. This setting posts fundamental computational challenges in sampling new chemical compounds that could satisfy multiple geometrical constraints imposed by pockets. Previous sampling algorithms either sample in the graph space or only consider the 3D coordinates of atoms while ignoring other detailed chemical structures such as bond types and functional groups. To address the challenge, we develop Pocket2Mol, an E(3)-equivariant generative network composed of two modules: 1) a new graph neural network capturing both spatial and bonding relationships between atoms of the binding pockets and 2) a new efficient algorithm which samples new drug candidates conditioned on the pocket representations from a tractable distribution without relying on MCMC. Experimental results demonstrate that molecules sampled from Pocket2Mol achieve significantly better binding affinity and other drug properties such as druglikeness and synthetic accessibility.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'Pocket2Mol is developed, an E(3)-equivariant generative network composed of a new graph neural network capturing both spatial and bonding relationships between atoms of the binding pockets and a new efficient algorithm which samples new drug candidates conditioned on the pocket representations from a tractable distribution without relying on MCMC.'}

# Deep generative model of constructing chemical latent space for small to large molecular structures with 3D complexity

Abstract: The structural diversity of chemical libraries, which are systematic collections of compounds that have potential to bind to biomolecules, can be represented by chemical latent space. A chemical latent space is a projection of a compound structure into a mathematical space based on several molecular features, and it can express structural diversity within a compound library in order to explore a broader chemical space and generate novel compound structures for drug

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'A chemical latent space is a projection of a compound structure into a mathematical space based on several molecular features that can express structural diversity within a compound library in order to explore a broader chemical space and generate novel compound structures for drug.'}

# An equivariant generative framework for molecular graph-structure Co-design

Abstract: Designing molecules with desirable physiochemical properties and functionalities is a long-standing challenge in chemistry, material science, and drug discovery. Recently, machine learning-based generative models have emerged as promising approaches for de novo molecule design. However, further refinement of methodology is highly desired as most existing methods lack unified modeling of 2D topology and 3D geometry information and fail to effectively learn the structure-property relationship for molecule design. Here we present MolCode, a roto-translation equivariant generative framework for Molecular graph-structure Co-design. In MolCode, 3D geometric information empowers the molecular 2D graph generation, which in turn helps guide the prediction of molecular 3D structure. Extensive experimental results show that MolCode outperforms previous methods on a series of challenging tasks including de novo molecule design, targeted molecule discovery, and structure-based drug design. Particularly, MolCode not only consistently generates valid (99.95% Validity) and diverse (98.75% Uniqueness) molecular graphs/structures with desirable properties, but also generate drug-like molecules with high affinity to target proteins (61.8% high affinity ratio), which demonstrates MolCode’s potential applications in material design and drug discovery. Our extensive investigation reveals that the 2D topology and 3D geometry contain intrinsically complementary information in molecule design, and provides new insights into machine learning-based molecule representation and generation.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'MolCode is presented, a roto-translation equivariant generative framework for Molecular graph-structure Co-design that outperforms previous methods on a series of challenging tasks including de novo molecule design, targeted molecule discovery, and structure-based drug design.'}

# 3DLinker: An E(3) Equivariant Variational Autoencoder for Molecular Linker Design

Abstract: Deep learning has achieved tremendous success in designing novel chemical compounds with desirable pharmaceutical properties. In this work, we focus on a new type of drug design problem -- generating a small"linker"to physically attach two independent molecules with their distinct functions. The main computational challenges include: 1) the generation of linkers is conditional on the two given molecules, in contrast to generating full molecules from scratch in previous works; 2) linkers heavily depend on the anchor atoms of the two molecules to be connected, which are not known beforehand; 3) 3D structures and orientations of the molecules need to be considered to avoid atom clashes, for which equivariance to E(3) group are necessary. To address these problems, we propose a conditional generative model, named 3DLinker, which is able to predict anchor atoms and jointly generate linker graphs and their 3D structures based on an E(3) equivariant graph variational autoencoder. So far as we know, there are no previous models that could achieve this task. We compare our model with multiple conditional generative models modified from other molecular design tasks and find that our model has a significantly higher rate in recovering molecular graphs, and more importantly, accurately predicting the 3D coordinates of all the atoms.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This work proposes a conditional generative model, named 3DLinker, which is able to predict anchor atoms and jointly generate linker graphs and their 3D structures based on an E(3) equivariant graph variational autoencoder.'}

# Augmented Memory: Sample-Efficient Generative Molecular Design with Reinforcement Learning

Abstract: None

TLDR: None

# PocketFlow: an autoregressive �ow model incorporated with chemical knowledge for generating drug-like molecules inside protein pockets

Abstract: Identifying an active seed compound against a specific target protein is the first but challenging step for initiating a new drug development project. Newly emerging deep generative models (DGMs) provide a rapid strategy to directly generate potential seed compounds inside protein pockets. However, the poor quality of generated molecules remains a major challenge, and whether these DGMs can generate bioactive molecules has not yet been wet-lab verified. We herein propose a new structure-based DGM, PocketFlow, which is an autoregressive flow model with chemical knowledge incorporated in molecular generation. PocketFlow can generate high-quality drug-like molecules with 100% chemical validity. In various evaluations, PocketFlow outperforms the current state-of-the-art DGMs. We applied PocketFlow to two new target proteins, HAT1 and YTHDC1, and successfully obtained wet-lab validated bioactive lead compounds. Overall, PocketFlow is the first wet-lab verified structure-based molecular DGM, highlighting the great potential of structure-based DGMs in drug discovery.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'PocketFlow is the first wet-lab verified structure-based molecular DGM, highlighting the great potential of structure-based DGMs in drug discovery.'}

# Deep Generative Models in De Novo Drug Molecule Generation

Abstract: The discovery of new drugs has important implications for human health. Traditional methods for drug discovery rely on experiments to optimize the structure of lead molecules, which are time-consuming and high-cost. Recently, artificial intelligence has exhibited promising and efficient performance for drug-like molecule generation. In particular, deep generative models achieve great success in de novo generation of drug-like molecules with desired properties, showing massive potential for novel drug discovery. In this study, we review the recent progress of molecule generation using deep generative models, mainly focusing on molecule representations, public databases, data processing tools, and advanced artificial intelligence based molecule generation frameworks. In particular, we present a comprehensive comparison of state-of-the-art deep generative models for molecule generation and a summary of commonly used molecular design strategies. We identify research gaps and challenges of molecule generation such as the need for better databases, missing 3D information in molecular representation, and the lack of high-precision evaluation metrics. We suggest future directions for molecular generation and drug discovery.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This study presents a comprehensive comparison of state-of-the-art deep generative models for molecule generation and a summary of commonly used molecular design strategies, and identifies research gaps and challenges of molecule generation such as the need for better databases, missing 3D information in molecular representation, and the lack of high-precision evaluation metrics.'}

# Generation of 3D molecules in pockets via a language model

Abstract: None

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'Lingo3DMol, a pocket-based 3D molecule generation method that combines language models and geometric deep learning technology, outperformed state-of-the-art methods in terms of drug likeness, synthetic accessibility, pocket binding mode and molecule generation speed.'}

# MolDiff: Addressing the Atom-Bond Inconsistency Problem in 3D Molecule Diffusion Generation

Abstract: Deep generative models have recently achieved superior performance in 3D molecule generation. Most of them first generate atoms and then add chemical bonds based on the generated atoms in a post-processing manner. However, there might be no corresponding bond solution for the temporally generated atoms as their locations are generated without considering potential bonds. We define this problem as the atom-bond inconsistency problem and claim it is the main reason for current approaches to generating unrealistic 3D molecules. To overcome this problem, we propose a new diffusion model called MolDiff which can generate atoms and bonds simultaneously while still maintaining their consistency by explicitly modeling the dependence between their relationships. We evaluated the generation ability of our proposed model and the quality of the generated molecules using criteria related to both geometry and chemical properties. The empirical studies showed that our model outperforms previous approaches, achieving a three-fold improvement in success rate and generating molecules with significantly better quality.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'A new diffusion model called MolDiff is proposed which can generate atoms and bonds simultaneously while still maintaining their consistency by explicitly modeling the dependence between their relationships.'}

# Bridging the gap between chemical reaction pretraining and conditional molecule generation with a unified model

Abstract: None

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'A unified framework that addresses both the reaction-representation learning and molecule generation tasks, which allows for a more holistic approach and develops a new pretraining framework that enables us to incorporate inductive biases into the model.'}

# Learning on topological surface and geometric structure for 3D molecular generation

Abstract: None

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'SurfGen is a structure-based drug design approach that delves into topological and geometric deep learning techniques for interaction learning, echoing the classical lock-and-key model.'}

# RediscMol: Benchmarking Molecular Generation Models in Biological Properties

Abstract: Deep learning-based molecular generative models have garnered emerging attention for their capability to generate molecules with novel structures and desired physicochemical properties. However, the evaluation of these models, particularly in a biological context, remains insufficient. To address the limitations of existing metrics and emulate practical application scenarios, we construct the RediscMol benchmark that comprises active molecules extracted from 5 kinase and 3 GPCR data sets. A set of rediscovery- and similarity-related metrics are introduced to assess the performance of 8 representative generative models (CharRNN, VAE, Reinvent, AAE, ORGAN, RNNAttn, TransVAE, and GraphAF). Our findings based on the RediscMol benchmark differ from those of previous evaluations. CharRNN, VAE, and Reinvent exhibit a greater ability to reproduce known active molecules, while RNNAttn, TransVAE, and GraphAF struggle in this aspect despite their notable performance on commonly used distribution-learning metrics. Our evaluation framework may provide valuable guidance for advancing generative models in real-world drug design scenarios.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'The RediscMol benchmark is constructed that comprises active molecules extracted from 5 kinase and 3 GPCR data sets and introduced to assess the performance of 8 representative generative models, finding CharRNN, VAE, Reinvent, AAE, ORGAN, RNNAttn, TransVAE, and GraphAF exhibit a greater ability to reproduce known active molecules.'}

# Variational autoencoder-based chemical latent space for large molecular structures with 3D complexity

Abstract: None

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'A variational autoencoder that can handle natural products and demonstrate its utility as an in silico drug discovery tool is developed.'}

# TacoGFN: Target-conditioned GFlowNet for Structure-based Drug Design

Abstract: Searching the vast chemical space for drug-like and synthesizable molecules with high binding affinity to a protein pocket is a challenging task in drug discovery. Recently, molecular deep generative models have been introduced which promise to be more efficient than exhaustive virtual screening, by directly generating molecules based on the protein structure. However, since they learn the distribution of a limited protein-ligand complex dataset, the existing methods struggle with generating novel molecules with significant property improvements. In this paper, we frame the generation task as a Reinforcement Learning task, where the goal is to search the wider chemical space for molecules with desirable properties as opposed to fitting a training data distribution. More specifically, we propose TacoGFN, a Generative Flow Network conditioned on protein pocket structure, using binding affinity, drug-likeliness and synthesizability measures as our reward. Empirically, our method outperforms state-of-art methods on the CrossDocked2020 benchmark for every molecular property (Vina score, QED, SA), while significantly improving the generation time. TacoGFN achieves $-8.82$ in median docking score and $52.63\%$ in Novel Hit Rate.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': "This paper proposes TacoGFN, a Generative Flow Network conditioned on protein pocket structure, using binding affinity, drug-likeliness and synthesizability measures as the authors' reward, and outperforms state-of-art methods on the CrossDocked2020 benchmark for every molecular property."}

# A 3D Generative Model for Structure-Based Drug Design

Abstract: We study a fundamental problem in structure-based drug design -- generating molecules that bind to specific protein binding sites. While we have witnessed the great success of deep generative models in drug design, the existing methods are mostly string-based or graph-based. They are limited by the lack of spatial information and thus unable to be applied to structure-based design tasks. Particularly, such models have no or little knowledge of how molecules interact with their target proteins exactly in 3D space. In this paper, we propose a 3D generative model that generates molecules given a designated 3D protein binding site. Specifically, given a binding site as the 3D context, our model estimates the probability density of atom's occurrences in 3D space -- positions that are more likely to have atoms will be assigned higher probability. To generate 3D molecules, we propose an auto-regressive sampling scheme -- atoms are sampled sequentially from the learned distribution until there is no room for new atoms. Combined with this sampling scheme, our model can generate valid and diverse molecules, which could be applicable to various structure-based molecular design tasks such as molecule sampling and linker design. Experimental results demonstrate that molecules sampled from our model exhibit high binding affinity to specific targets and good drug properties such as drug-likeness even if the model is not explicitly optimized for them.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'A 3D generative model that generates molecules given a designated 3D protein binding site that exhibits high binding affinity to specific targets and good drug properties such as drug-likeness even if the model is not explicitly optimized for them is proposed.'}

# Functional-Group-Based Diffusion for Pocket-Specific Molecule Generation and Elaboration

Abstract: In recent years, AI-assisted drug design methods have been proposed to generate molecules given the pockets' structures of target proteins. Most of them are atom-level-based methods, which consider atoms as basic components and generate atom positions and types. In this way, however, it is hard to generate realistic fragments with complicated structures. To solve this, we propose D3FG, a functional-group-based diffusion model for pocket-specific molecule generation and elaboration. D3FG decomposes molecules into two categories of components: functional groups defined as rigid bodies and linkers as mass points. And the two kinds of components can together form complicated fragments that enhance ligand-protein interactions. To be specific, in the diffusion process, D3FG diffuses the data distribution of the positions, orientations, and types of the components into a prior distribution; In the generative process, the noise is gradually removed from the three variables by denoisers parameterized with designed equivariant graph neural networks. In the experiments, our method can generate molecules with more realistic 3D structures, competitive affinities toward the protein targets, and better drug properties. Besides, D3FG as a solution to a new task of molecule elaboration, could generate molecules with high affinities based on existing ligands and the hotspots of target proteins.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'D3FG, a functional-group-based diffusion model for pocket-specific molecule generation and elaboration, could generate molecules with high affinities based on existing ligands and the hotspots of target proteins.'}

# Unified Generative Modeling of 3D Molecules via Bayesian Flow Networks

Abstract: Advanced generative model (e.g., diffusion model) derived from simplified continuity assumptions of data distribution, though showing promising progress, has been difficult to apply directly to geometry generation applications due to the multi-modality and noise-sensitive nature of molecule geometry. This work introduces Geometric Bayesian Flow Networks (GeoBFN), which naturally fits molecule geometry by modeling diverse modalities in the differentiable parameter space of distributions. GeoBFN maintains the SE-(3) invariant density modeling property by incorporating equivariant inter-dependency modeling on parameters of distributions and unifying the probabilistic modeling of different modalities. Through optimized training and sampling techniques, we demonstrate that GeoBFN achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple 3D molecule generation benchmarks in terms of generation quality (90.87% molecule stability in QM9 and 85.6% atom stability in GEOM-DRUG. GeoBFN can also conduct sampling with any number of steps to reach an optimal trade-off between efficiency and quality (e.g., 20-times speedup without sacrificing performance).

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'Geometric Bayesian Flow Networks (GeoBFN), which naturally fits molecule geometry by modeling diverse modalities in the differentiable parameter space of distributions, maintains the SE-(3) invariant density modeling property by incorporating equivariant inter- dependency modeling on parameters of distributions and unifying the probabilistic modeling of different modalities.'}

# De novo Drug Design using Reinforcement Learning with Multiple GPT Agents

Abstract: De novo drug design is a pivotal issue in pharmacology and a new area of focus in AI for science research. A central challenge in this field is to generate molecules with specific properties while also producing a wide range of diverse candidates. Although advanced technologies such as transformer models and reinforcement learning have been applied in drug design, their potential has not been fully realized. Therefore, we propose MolRL-MGPT, a reinforcement learning algorithm with multiple GPT agents for drug molecular generation. To promote molecular diversity, we encourage the agents to collaborate in searching for desirable molecules in diverse directions. Our algorithm has shown promising results on the GuacaMol benchmark and exhibits efficacy in designing inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2 protein targets. The codes are available at: <https://github.com/HXYfighter/MolRL-MGPT>.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'The proposed MolRL-MGPT, a reinforcement learning algorithm with multiple GPT agents for drug molecular generation that has shown promising results on the GuacaMol benchmark and exhibits efficacy in designing inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2 protein targets.'}

# A dual diffusion model enables 3D binding bioactive molecule generation and lead optimization given target pockets

Abstract: Structure-based generative chemistry aims to explore much bigger chemical space to design a ligand with high binding affinity to the target proteins; it is a critical step in de novo computer-aided drug discovery. Traditional in silico methods suffer from calculation inefficiency and the performances of existing machine learning methods could be bottlenecked by the auto-regressive sampling strategy. To address these concerns, we herein have developed a novel conditional deep generative model, PMDM, for 3D molecule generation fitting specified target proteins. PMDM incorporates a dual equivariant diffusion model framework to leverage the local and global molecular dynamics to generate 3D molecules in a one-shot fashion. By considering the conditioned protein semantic information and spatial information, PMDM is able to generate chemically and conformationally valid molecules which suitably fit pocket holes. We have conducted comprehensive experiments to demonstrate that PMDM can generate drug-like, synthesis-accessible, novel, and high-binding affinity molecules targeting specific proteins, outperforming the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models in terms of multiple evaluation metrics. In addition, we perform chemical space analysis for generated molecules and lead compound optimization for SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) by only utilizing three atoms as the seed fragment. The experimental results implicate that the structures of generated molecules are rational compared to the reference molecules, and PMDM can generate massive bioactive molecules highly binding to the targeted proteins which are not included in the training set.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'It is demonstrated that PMDM can generate drug-like, synthesis-accessible, novel, and high-binding affinity molecules targeting specific proteins, outperforming the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models in terms of multiple evaluation metrics.'}

# Structure-Based Drug Design via 3D Molecular Generative Pre-training and Sampling

Abstract: Structure-based drug design aims at generating high affinity ligands with prior knowledge of 3D target structures. Existing methods either use conditional generative model to learn the distribution of 3D ligands given target binding sites, or iteratively modify molecules to optimize a structure-based activity estimator. The former is highly constrained by data quantity and quality, which leaves optimization-based approaches more promising in practical scenario. However, existing optimization-based approaches choose to edit molecules in 2D space, and use molecular docking to estimate the activity using docking predicted 3D target-ligand complexes. The misalignment between the action space and the objective hinders the performance of these models, especially for those employ deep learning for acceleration. In this work, we propose MolEdit3D to combine 3D molecular generation with optimization frameworks. We develop a novel 3D graph editing model to generate molecules using fragments, and pre-train this model on abundant 3D ligands for learning target-independent properties. Then we employ a target-guided self-learning strategy to improve target-related properties using self-sampled molecules. MolEdit3D achieves state-of-the-art performance on majority of the evaluation metrics, and demonstrate strong capability of capturing both target-dependent and -independent properties.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This work develops a novel 3D graph editing model to generate molecules using fragments, and pre-train this model on abundant 3D ligands for learning target-independent properties, and employs a target-guided self-learning strategy to improve target-related properties using self-sampled molecules.'}

# Equivariant Shape-Conditioned Generation of 3D Molecules for Ligand-Based Drug Design

Abstract: Shape-based virtual screening is widely employed in ligand-based drug design to search chemical libraries for molecules with similar 3D shapes yet novel 2D chemical structures compared to known ligands. 3D deep generative models have the potential to automate this exploration of shape-conditioned 3D chemical space; however, no existing models can reliably generate valid drug-like molecules in conformations that adopt a specific shape such as a known binding pose. We introduce a new multimodal 3D generative model that enables shape-conditioned 3D molecular design by equivariantly encoding molecular shape and variationally encoding chemical identity. We ensure local geometric and chemical validity of generated molecules by using autoregressive fragment-based generation with heuristic bonding geometries, allowing the model to prioritize the scoring of rotatable bonds to best align the growing conformational structure to the target shape. We evaluate our 3D generative model in tasks relevant to drug design including shape-conditioned generation of chemically diverse molecular structures and shape-constrained molecular property optimization, demonstrating its utility over virtual screening of enumerated libraries.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This work introduces a new multimodal 3D generative model that enables shape-conditioned 3D molecular design by equivariantly encoding molecular shape and variationally encoding chemical identity, and ensures local geometric and chemical validity of generated molecules by using autoregressive fragment-based generation with heuristic bonding geometries.'}

# DecompOpt: Controllable and Decomposed Diffusion Models for Structure-based Molecular Optimization

Abstract: Recently, 3D generative models have shown promising performances in structure-based drug design by learning to generate ligands given target binding sites. However, only modeling the target-ligand distribution can hardly fulfill one of the main goals in drug discovery -- designing novel ligands with desired properties, e.g., high binding affinity, easily synthesizable, etc. This challenge becomes particularly pronounced when the target-ligand pairs used for training do not align with these desired properties. Moreover, most existing methods aim at solving \textit{de novo} design task, while many generative scenarios requiring flexible controllability, such as R-group optimization and scaffold hopping, have received little attention. In this work, we propose DecompOpt, a structure-based molecular optimization method based on a controllable and decomposed diffusion model. DecompOpt presents a new generation paradigm which combines optimization with conditional diffusion models to achieve desired properties while adhering to the molecular grammar. Additionally, DecompOpt offers a unified framework covering both \textit{de novo} design and controllable generation. To achieve so, ligands are decomposed into substructures which allows fine-grained control and local optimization. Experiments show that DecompOpt can efficiently generate molecules with improved properties than strong de novo baselines, and demonstrate great potential in controllable generation tasks.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'DecompOpt presents a new generation paradigm which combines optimization with conditional diffusion models to achieve desired properties while adhering to the molecular grammar, and offers a unified framework covering both de novo design and controllable generation.'}

# TacoGFN: Target Conditioned GFlowNet for Structure-Based Drug Design

Abstract: We seek to automate the generation of drug-like compounds conditioned to specific protein pocket targets. Most current methods approximate the protein-molecule distribution of a finite dataset and, therefore struggle to generate molecules with significant binding improvement over the training dataset. We instead frame the pocket-conditioned molecular generation task as an RL problem and develop T ACO GFN, a target conditional Generative Flow Network model. Our method is explicitly encouraged to generate molecules with desired properties as opposed to fitting on a pre-existing data distribution. To this end, we develop transformer-based docking score prediction to speed up docking score computation and propose T ACO GFN to explore molecule space efficiently. Furthermore, we incorporate several rounds of active learning where generated samples are queried using a docking oracle to improve the docking score prediction. This approach allows us to accurately explore as much of the molecule landscape as we can afford computationally. Empirically, molecules generated using T ACO GFN and its variants significantly outperform all baseline methods across every property (Docking score, QED, SA, Lipinski), while being orders of magnitude faster.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'T ACO GFN, a target conditional Generative Flow Network model, is developed to generate molecules with desired properties as opposed to fitting on a pre-existing data distribution to speed up docking score computation.'}

# Augmented Memory: Capitalizing on Experience Replay to Accelerate De Novo Molecular Design

Abstract: Sample efficiency is a fundamental challenge in de novo molecular design. Ideally, molecular generative models should learn to satisfy a desired objective under minimal oracle evaluations (computational prediction or wet-lab experiment). This problem becomes more apparent when using oracles that can provide increased predictive accuracy but impose a significant cost. Consequently, these oracles cannot be directly optimized under a practical budget. Molecular generative models have shown remarkable sample efficiency when coupled with reinforcement learning, as demonstrated in the Practical Molecular Optimization (PMO) benchmark. Here, we propose a novel algorithm called Augmented Memory that combines data augmentation with experience replay. We show that scores obtained from oracle calls can be reused to update the model multiple times. We compare Augmented Memory to previously proposed algorithms and show significantly enhanced sample efficiency in an exploitation task and a drug discovery case study requiring both exploration and exploitation. Our method achieves a new state-of-the-art in the PMO benchmark which enforces a computational budget, outperforming the previous best performing method on 19/23 tasks.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This work proposes a novel algorithm called Augmented Memory that combines data augmentation with experience replay and shows that scores obtained from oracle calls can be reused to update the model multiple times, achieving a new state-of-the-art in the PMO benchmark which enforces a computational budget.'}

# Autoregressive fragment-based diffusion for pocket-aware ligand design

Abstract: In this work, we introduce AutoFragDiff, a fragment-based autoregressive diffusion model for generating 3D molecular structures conditioned on target protein structures. We employ geometric vector perceptrons to predict atom types and spatial coordinates of new molecular fragments conditioned on molecular scaffolds and protein pockets. Our approach improves the local geometry of the resulting 3D molecules while maintaining high predicted binding affinity to protein targets. The model can also perform scaffold extension from user-provided starting molecular scaffold.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'This work introduces AutoFragDiff, a fragment-based autoregressive diffusion model for generating 3D molecular structures conditioned on target protein structures that improves the local geometry of the resulting 3D molecules while maintaining high predicted binding affinity to protein targets.'}

# GraphVF: Controllable Protein-Specific 3D Molecule Generation with Variational Flow

Abstract: Designing molecules that bind to specific target proteins is a fundamental task in drug discovery. Recent models leverage geometric constraints to generate ligand molecules that bind cohesively with specific protein pockets. However, these models cannot effectively generate 3D molecules with 2D skeletal curtailments and property constraints, which are pivotal to drug potency and development. To tackle this challenge, we propose GraphVF, a variational flow-based framework that combines 2D topology and 3D geometry, for controllable generation of binding 3D molecules. Empirically, our method achieves state-of-the-art binding affinity and realistic sub-structural layouts for protein-specific generation. In particular, GraphVF represents the first controllable geometry-aware, protein-specific molecule generation method, which can generate binding 3D molecules with tailored sub-structures and physio-chemical properties. Our code is available at <https://github.com/Franco-Solis/GraphVF-code>.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'GraphVF represents the first controllable geometry-aware, protein-specific molecule generation method, which can generate binding 3D molecules with tailored sub-structures and physio-chemical properties.'}

# 3D Molecular Generation via Virtual Dynamics

Abstract: Structure-based drug design, i.e., finding molecules with high affinities to the target protein pocket, is one of the most critical tasks in drug discovery. Traditional solutions, like virtual screening, require exhaustively searching on a large molecular database, which are inefficient and cannot return novel molecules beyond the database. The pocket-based 3D molecular generation model, i.e., directly generating a molecule with a 3D structure and binding position in the pocket, is a new promising way to address this issue. Herein, we propose VD-Gen, a novel pocket-based 3D molecular generation pipeline. VD-Gen consists of several carefully designed stages to generate fine-grained 3D molecules with binding positions in the pocket cavity end-to-end. Rather than directly generating or sampling atoms with 3D positions in the pocket like in early attempts, in VD-Gen, we first randomly initialize many virtual particles in the pocket; then iteratively move these virtual particles, making the distribution of virtual particles approximate the distribution of molecular atoms. After virtual particles are stabilized in 3D space, we extract a 3D molecule from them. Finally, we further refine atoms in the extracted molecule by iterative movement again, to get a high-quality 3D molecule, and predict a confidence score for it. Extensive experiment results on pocket-based molecular generation demonstrate that VD-Gen can generate novel 3D molecules to fill the target pocket cavity with high binding affinities, significantly outperforming previous baselines.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'Extensive experiment results on pocket-based molecular generation demonstrate that VD-Gen can generate novel 3D molecules to fill the target pocket cavity with high binding affinities, significantly outperforming previous baselines.'}

# FlexiDock: Compositional diffusion models for flexible molecular docking

Abstract: Molecular docking is a critical process in structure-based drug discovery to predict the binding conformations between a protein and a small molecule ligand. Recently, deep learning-based methods have achieved promising performance over traditional physics-based search-and-score methods. Despite their success on accurately predicting the binding poses of the small molecule ligands, modeling of protein flexibility and dynamics still remains largely unexplored for docking. We observe that models that do not account for the protein flexibility suffer a large performance drop in cases where proteins undergo large conformational changes upon ligand binding. To address this gap, we developed FlexiDock, a compositional alternating neural diffusion process, which include two diffusion models to explicitly model the conformational flexibilities of proteins and ligands, respectively. The compositional diffusion process is inspired by the induced-fit model in flexible docking. We found the compositional diffusion is able to improve the structural prediction of the proteins upon ligand binding. Our method also offers promising insights into modeling proteins’ conformational switches.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'FlexiDock is developed, a compositional alternating neural diffusion process, which include two diffusion models to explicitly model the conformational flexibilities of proteins and ligands, respectively that are able to improve the structural prediction of the proteins upon ligand binding.'}

# DiffDock: Diffusion Steps, Twists, and Turns for Molecular Docking

Abstract: Predicting the binding structure of a small molecule ligand to a protein -- a task known as molecular docking -- is critical to drug design. Recent deep learning methods that treat docking as a regression problem have decreased runtime compared to traditional search-based methods but have yet to offer substantial improvements in accuracy. We instead frame molecular docking as a generative modeling problem and develop DiffDock, a diffusion generative model over the non-Euclidean manifold of ligand poses. To do so, we map this manifold to the product space of the degrees of freedom (translational, rotational, and torsional) involved in docking and develop an efficient diffusion process on this space. Empirically, DiffDock obtains a 38% top-1 success rate (RMSD<2A) on PDBBind, significantly outperforming the previous state-of-the-art of traditional docking (23%) and deep learning (20%) methods. Moreover, while previous methods are not able to dock on computationally folded structures (maximum accuracy 10.4%), DiffDock maintains significantly higher precision (21.7%). Finally, DiffDock has fast inference times and provides confidence estimates with high selective accuracy.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'DiffDock is developed, a diffusion generative model over the non-Euclidean manifold of ligand poses, which maintains significantly higher precision than previous methods and has fast inference times and provides confidence estimates with high selective accuracy.'}

# Harmonic Self-Conditioned Flow Matching for Multi-Ligand Docking and Binding Site Design

Abstract: A significant amount of protein function requires binding small molecules, including enzymatic catalysis. As such, designing binding pockets for small molecules has several impactful applications ranging from drug synthesis to energy storage. Towards this goal, we first develop HarmonicFlow, an improved generative process over 3D protein-ligand binding structures based on our self-conditioned flow matching objective. FlowSite extends this flow model to jointly generate a protein pocket's discrete residue types and the molecule's binding 3D structure. We show that HarmonicFlow improves upon the state-of-the-art generative processes for docking in simplicity, generality, and performance. Enabled by this structure modeling, FlowSite designs binding sites substantially better than baseline approaches and provides the first general solution for binding site design.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': "HarmonicFlow is developed, an improved generative process over 3D protein-ligand binding structures based on the authors' self-conditioned flow matching objective, and FlowSite, the first general solution for binding site design, is provided."}

# Deep Confident Steps to New Pockets: Strategies for Docking Generalization

Abstract: Accurate blind docking has the potential to lead to new biological breakthroughs, but for this promise to be realized, docking methods must generalize well across the proteome. Existing benchmarks, however, fail to rigorously assess generalizability. Therefore, we develop DockGen, a new benchmark based on the ligand-binding domains of proteins, and we show that existing machine learning-based docking models have very weak generalization abilities. We carefully analyze the scaling laws of ML-based docking and show that, by scaling data and model size, as well as integrating synthetic data strategies, we are able to significantly increase the generalization capacity and set new state-of-the-art performance across benchmarks. Further, we propose Confidence Bootstrapping, a new training paradigm that solely relies on the interaction between diffusion and confidence models and exploits the multi-resolution generation process of diffusion models. We demonstrate that Confidence Bootstrapping significantly improves the ability of ML-based docking methods to dock to unseen protein classes, edging closer to accurate and generalizable blind docking methods.

TLDR: {'model': 'tldr@v2.0.0', 'text': 'DockGen is developed, a new benchmark based on the ligand-binding domains of proteins, and Confidence Bootstrapping is proposed, a new training paradigm that solely relies on the interaction between diffusion and confidence models and exploits the multi-resolution generation process of diffusion models.'}
